---
layout: post
title: UK EU Referendum Update
tags: future-plans community
categories: blog
---

The recent EU referendum will undoubtedly have implications for the future of
UK science. It now seems equally clear that those implications will remain
unknown for some time to come. No matter what happens next, we want to
emphasize our ongoing commitment to the OME project and to our community.

It is unlikely that our current funding will be altered by the outcome of the
referendum or by the apparent upcoming changes to the political landscape. The
major awards that support OME’s work--from the Wellcome Trust and BBSRC--are
from UK-based institutions.  We also participate in several EU projects--
[Euro-BioImaging](http://www.eurobioimaging.eu/),
[Global BioImaging](http://www.eurobioimaging.eu/global-bioimaging),
[MULTIMOT](https://cordis.europa.eu/project/id/634107), and
[CORBEL](https://www.elixir-europe.org/about/eu-projects/corbel)--that will
expire within the two-year window being discussed in the media as the minimum
time needed to negotiate a UK departure from the EU. Our understanding is that
our participation in these projects is not in question. (We also have newly
awarded funding to announce--once we have the final documentation!)

Furthermore, our recent [Users Meeting in Dundee](http://www.openmicroscopy.org/site/community/minutes/meetings/11th-annual-users-meeting-2016)
once again confirmed strong support from our community and the critical need
to develop the tools that will enable the discoveries from next generation
imaging technologies that are now appearing in the community’s laboratories.
None of our immediate milestones will be modified, and we will keep delivering
[Bio-Formats](http://www.openmicroscopy.org/site/products/bio-formats),
[OMERO](https://www.openmicroscopy.org/site/products/omero), and the
[Image Data Resource](http://idr.openmicroscopy.org/)[^1] just as our users
expect. We will continue to explore new avenues for funding, based on our
community’s need and validation of our software, just as we have done since
2002.

Since the project’s origins, our identity and values have been rooted in
openness, and international, cross-cultural collaboration. OME’s achievements
have always been made possible by the combined talents of an international
team, dedicated to open source software, open development practice, and open
engagement with our broad, diverse, and dedicated user community. Today, the
members of our development team represent more than ten different nations from
both within and outside the EU. Many of us are “immigrants”--we’ve actively
chosen to live in new countries with our families to deliver on the promises
of interoperability and scale in scientific image informatics. We are a
dedicated, multi-national, multi-lingual team that builds and delivers tools
that support the global bioimaging community. We think diversity is one of our
strengths, as it ensures a range of viewpoints and ideas. We therefore
reaffirm our support for inclusion and diversity, and strongly object to the
politics of fear and racism that have characterised some of the recent
political discussions, referenda and elections. We are an example of the best
aspects of the modern, interconnected world that unites dedicated, talented
individuals, regardless of race, religion, gender, sexual identity or national
origin, with a mission to drive scientific insight and discovery for the
benefit of all humankind.

[^1]: At the time of publication, this was referred to as the 'Image Data Repository'.